All right.
So we're going to start off by taking a bit of a step back and talking about two very high level general
questions that are pretty central to everything this course is about and they are.
First off what is database seems like a pretty straightforward question but there is a little bit of
terminology you need to discuss.
And then secondly why do they matter.
So let's start off with the first one what is a database what actually makes something database and
there are a couple of definitions that we could go with here.
I kind of synthesized some of them into my own definition that has two parts.
And the first part is that it's a collection of data which seems pretty straightforward.
There are all sorts of collections of data around us in the real world things like when you go to your
doctor's office and there's a filing cabinet full of medical records or even just that a to do list
or a list of things to buy at the grocery store qualifies as a collection of data or going back a little
bit in time.
If you remember what Rolodexes word a Rolodex full of different people's contact information that qualifies
as a database.
Under this definition.
Speaking of archaic technology like a Rolodex.
Another example of a database is a phone book.
So I say this mainly jokingly but I actually have some siblings who don't know what phone book is or
they've never seen one or used one before.
It's a gigantic book basically that you look up people's phone numbers based off of their name.
So it's usually organized by last name alphabetically for people.
So you would look through the book until you find someone's last name and then you would try and match
the first name and then you find the phone number.
So let's take a quick example here.
This is a fictional phonebook.
Think of it as just a little section of a phone book that has tens of thousands of entries.
And these are fictional characters alphabetically organized by their last name.
So Archie Andrews comes in for Betty Cooper who comes before Ned Flanders and so on.
And then we have corresponding phone numbers.
So imagine you have a gigantic phonebook with this information in it.
And I asked you to do something like find Ned Flanders phone number Well it's actually pretty straightforward
as long as you're comfortable using the alphabet in alphabetical order.
You look through the book until you find f f l and so on until you find Ned Flanders and then you find
his phone number.
It's what the phone book is made for.
However it gets a little trickier or a lot trickier it really if I ask you to do something like find
everyone in the phone book who has the first name.
Ned there isn't an easy way to do this.
You basically would have to go through every entry in the book and check for how many thousands there
are is this person's name.
So I have a couple other questions that are similarly difficult.
So the point here is just if you were to find all phone numbers with a particular area code or to find
all people who have a three letter first name it's not easy and it would take a lot of time.
Like a ton of time.
So that brings me to the next component of the definition of what makes something a database.
In my opinion which is not just a collection of data.
It also contains a method for accessing and manipulating that data.
So going back to this phone book we would want a way some sort of program or code that would allow us
to do things like find everybody with the first name net or find all people who have a three letter
first name or even do things like add a new person into the phone book or change area codes or change
phone numbers or get crazy and just delete people from our phone book or delete everybody if we wanted
to we would have some sort of program or code as part of our database that would help with that that
would allow us to interface with the data.
So I did say we were going to dive a little bit into the jargon and terminology.
I usually try to stay away from that early on while I try and stay away from that in general but especially
early on in the course.
Basically if you've read about databases if you've used one before if you've read a blog post about
them you may have come across the term database management system or relational database management
system or DMX or RB DNS all these different acronyms.
Basically this right here what I have on the screen database versus database management system refers
to the fact that what I just talked about having data collection of data and then having an interface
for that data are two different things.
So let me show you a quick example.
Imagine that you have an application.
Let's say it is a dating app and then you have a database and you're storing all sorts of information
all the different users all the different messages that have been sent the photos whatever else goes
into your dating app but on its own.
The database here is basically like our phone book.
It's a gigantic collection of data which is great for storing data but it really doesn't do very much.
You can almost think of it as if it was a gigantic file on your computer.
So for our application to be able to do things like Update somebody's username in the database or edit
their profile photo or delete a user if they want to leave our application whatever it is there's a
database management system that allows us to interface with that database.
So it's just the code to the program that does the talking to our database for us.
So we talked to our database management system and it talks to the database.
OK.
So for the most part we're out of the weeds with the jargon here.
The reason I brought this up though is that oftentimes when people talk about data rates you actually
hear them referring to both of these things.
The database management system and the database together just as a database.
So what I have right here is a list of some of the more common databases you'll run into.
And actually I just did it there when I was just talking about these four things.
PostgreSQL my Eskew Well Oracle sequel lite.
They're not technically databases.
They're actually database management systems.
But for the most part people just call them databases.
So when we say things like my as well as one of the most commonly used databases it's actually one of
the most commonly used database management systems.
So it's not the end of the world if you forget about that but it is important because it will help you
understand later on when we actually start talking about a sequel when we start talking about some of
the code that you write to interact with the database.
I think it will help you understand what you're doing and that you're giving commands to this database
management system which then goes and gives commands to the actual data itself or to the database itself.
OK so to wrap everything up here's a little bit of a synthesized definition.
What is a database.
Well it's a structured set of computerized data with an accessible interface.